Do you happen to remember when Worley sold out? You
know what? Worley sold out that fellow named Carr
lived in Austin. And Carr sold out. He sold that
land out there to old man Foster. Old man Foster. He
had a jetty. And that land all belonged to jetty.
Jetty? Yeah, a fella by the name of Jetty. And Old
Man Foster married his daughter. After Old Man
Jetty died, you see that Old Man Foster fell out of
that land over there in the mine. And then Old Man
Foster got in bad shape and moved to town. He sold
the coffee. So coffee owns all that out there now.
One thing I noticed,
to get back to the social activities, they said the
baseball games were big. Oh, hell, them Nets can
get over there. The company give them a little
land, they can play it all, and they played
baseball the other Saturday and Sunday. Well,
were there company baseball teams? Yeah, there
was one company that played the other company.
See, there's several minds. One company, a
baseball player, would come and play the other
baseball game. It'd be just like... Did you ever
play baseball with them? Oh, yeah, I played a whole
lot. I didn't work with shit.
Were Mexicans pretty good ballplayers? They were
pretty good, yeah. Did their wives and kids come
out and watch? Oh, yeah. When did they usually play
these baseball games? They still have some games
here now. Last year they had a game they played at
the fire park up here. But the mining companies got
together? These boys, they don't... They're not
coal miners anymore, though. They work for these
farmers, you know, and they get together. These
boys live in town and work on these public jobs.
They'd get together, send dogs somewheres, some
other town in Michigan to come from other towns to
play them, just like they do with these big ball
games, you know. They'd come to other places, and
they'd have games.
The best damn players I ever seen was a damned old
nigger. Oh, really? Yeah. But he wasn't with mine,
so. No.
Well, I cannot put my finger on what date we were
talking about.
Do you remember that? I wasn't married then. I was
single. My daddy was one. See, my daddy was a, he had
pneumonia. And Herman Vogel was running the
engine and my daddy and I was working under him.
They had a big hole in the boiler and they were
waiting for a boiler repair. And it was on our last
flat to load out. The boiler split right half in
two. One of them back in went out and the other went
all over the damn country to find bricks. They had
bricks, you know. We had them bricks all over. You
could find them three or four miles from there,
where that boiler blowed up and blowed them bricks
up. The damn timber fell on my head over there. They
had a tween wall between the boiler and the engine.
And me and the engine there was a... It covered us
up. It hadn't been for that inside wall over here
that killed us. It just caved it over on us. And we
scrambled out one of them. Rogel didn't get hurt at
all. Two or four fell across my head. They put three
stitches in it. So you were real lucky. Yeah. Let me
ask you this. One thing I've been confused about is
that did the coal companies engage in the brick
building business also? No. See, at Rogel, when
they started there, they had brick yards. And they
made brick. They used the old lignite to burn the
brick with. They had a brickyard down there. Vogel
did. That's what I thought. Okay. And he used the
lignite to fuel the... They used the old lignite.
Did you work on that at all? I never did work. Well,
that's where I started. I started the brickyard
when I was 16 years old. 15, 20 cents an hour. Then
after the brickyard, they stayed there a long
time. They had niggers work the brickyard. Them
goddamn niggers like that. They had these little
wheel boys loaded up full of bricks. They'd have
these running. They'd load them bricks them days
in boxcars. Sometimes they'd load four or five
boxcars of bricks a day. Shipped them to different
places. I'll go down there and show you where that
old brickyard used to be. There's all that brick
there. It's down there by the old Bogle mine?
Mm-hmm. Well, we might do that, you know, if you
feel like it sometimes. You ever see one of them
bricks? Okay,
could
you go back over how they made the bricks again? You
said they made some sort of clay? They had these,
they had mules them days and them slips, you know,
the scraper, you used to call them scrapers. That
was a harness on to the... Yeah. Had mules in those
days. They didn't have no such thing as trucks or
nothing like that. Yeah. And they had these big
outfits that they loaded this clay in. They'd dump
it. It had a big old outfit that goes around, goes
plumb around. And they'd dump that clay in there.
And they had belts to carry this, and they'd dump it
in the press. And that press would work up and down,
four bricks at a time. Four bricks at a time? Four
bricks at a time. And there'd be a man out there that
loaded in these wheelbars. They'd be raw bricks,
but they'd be pressed enough that they wouldn't
come apart. Right. And they'd haul them and put
them in them burners. In a burner? In them burners,
and then burn the brick. And when they come out,
that's when they load them in there. I see. And they
used the lignite to fire the burners. They fired
the burners. There was... They had little old
openings. They had the cast-on outfits in them.
They had these bow and burners, you know, grates,
late-night grates. They'd put that in and they'd
say, well, these are about that long. And these
long keels, and they'd get them, that raw brick in
there, these long keels over there, and there'd be
one About every foot there'd be one of them
openings where you put the lignite in. On both
sides, on the north side and south side. And you'd
just shovel it in? Yeah, they'd start to eat it.
You'd smoke them kind of like that about a week.
Then about two weeks after that, they'd put hot
fire in there. And that's what made them. How long
did it take to fire them for? Well, it'd take them
four days. It'd take them longer to smoke them.
They'd smoke them about two or three weeks. And
they'd get them kind of solid. And it'd take about
eight or ten days before they'd be hard as that. You
were talking earlier that they had a change in the
type of lighting system they used in the mines.
What was the first type of lighting system they
used? I guess it'd be back in the 1890s, early
1900s? Yeah, I bet so. I don't know when that coal
mine started. It was already running, see, when my
daddy came in. What kind of a light system did they
use for the hand? You said they had a... Well, these
lamps, these lamps is all they used. When they
first started, they had these, just like I tell
you, little torches. Little torches? Just like a
lamp. I see. There's a stem stuck out that way, and
they put the oil on top. They put oil on them. They
put oil in them. That oil is just... You've seen
these torches that you put on the highways, you
know? That's the way they fixed with a wick in them.
I see. They'd have a wick about... four or five
inches long, they'd stick it down in there, close
it up, run it out through that spout, and that oil
would keep, they'd have to light them with
matches. They didn't have none like carbide then.
It kept a pocket full of matches. And that little
lamp oil would burn you all day long. I see. It was
kind of dangerous though, wasn't it, when the oil
spilled? Well, all it would do is get your head
green. But one thing about it, when there was
something wrong in there and wasn't good, them
lamps wouldn't burn. If you went in one black, in a
black damp or something in there, you better not go
in there. When that light went out, you better not
go in there. That light will let you know not to go in
there. And these carbide lamps, they won't go out.
But when there's black damp over there, that blaze
will be that fur, and when you get in that black
damp, It'll come way out here. That shows you got
black damp. These carbide lamps show you that,
too. Now, this is black damp? Black damp. D-A-M-P?
It's where there's no air, you see. You can get in
there and go black damp. Just like sometimes, you
know, people go in the well, they call it black
damp. I see. You go in there, and if you're in old
coal mine, you go in there, and if you're getting
black damp, you can smell it. It smells plum sweet.
I see. Well, you better down here or not go in there.
Did that happen quite a bit in these mines? It was
once in a while, but they know what it was. And so
they'd get out, and how would they take away the
black dam? They'd open some more out, take it away,
and put air in. They had these engines on the
outside, and they had these big propellers, and
that would draw that bad air out of there. I see.
That'd give you air in the coal mines, too, you see.
They opened a little tunnel and they put this fan
over there. It was run by steam. It was run
steaming. And they'd have wings on them. You've
seen these propellers just like these
air-conditioned fans? Well, it was made kind of
like that. But it was a great big thing. You know, as
big as this house. And they'd go down in these
diggers' outfits where the air could go in there.
And that's what's funnest to marry down in them
mines. I see. Did you have any sons or daughters
yourself when you were married? I got one
daughter. I got one daughter. It's the only
daughter I got. I got a stepdaughter and two
stepsons. What did your stepsons do? Did they
follow you? My stepson, he was in a car wreck and his
brain's scattered. He's in the hospital. And my
daughter lives in Houston, my granddaughter. And
my daughter lives in Bryan. She married a
Bohemian. You have two stepsons? Two step-sons
and one step-daughter, and then my own daughter.
My wife died in 46. I never did marry no more. My kids
was all grown when she died. Did your other
step-son become a miner also, or did he do
something else? No, he never did work at the coal
mine. Would you think, Willie, that coal mines
would be good for Rockdale? How do you view the coal
mine? I mean, it was your livelihood from most of
your life. Well, they were good days. Good days?
Everything was cheap. Go up there and you can buy a
pound of bacon for 15, 20 cents. Coffee, 25 and 30
cents. Everything was cheap.
Well, they had these commissaries. Nearly every
one of them had a commissary and they sold
groceries. They'd charge your groceries to you
and then when you got a payday, they'd take it off
you, off your bill. What did the commissaries look
like? Well, Dr. Sparks had a great big old
commissary when he bought it. But the other places
just had little commissaries. Well, was Dr.
Sparks' commissary a two-story or? No, it was kind
of long, long building, about, looks like about
30, 40 feet long, about... 15, 20 feet wide. But he
kept it well stocked. He could get anything he
couldn't down, all but clothes. And what mine was
Dr. Storys associated with? The Worley mine?
Worley mine. Worley? That's the first one that
started there.
Well, did they have counters? in the commissary
or? Yeah, they had county. You went over there and
you tell them what they want and they'd give you
what they want. You didn't go back and pick up
things like you do now. I see. They went and got
everything for you. They went and got everything.
You called for what you want and they'd go get it for
you. Put it on the county and put it on your bill. I
see. They kept a little leisure. You didn't go help
yourself then, didn't they? I see. Not like the
safe way. They wouldn't have much left. Time was
good then, but they'd steal everything you had. I
see. Well, did the Mexican women or the Mexican men
go to the commissary to shop? No, they had some
Mexican women. They had men who worked for them in
the commissary. I see. No, no, I never did know of
any women working at the commissary. Well, which
one of the household? Would it be the wife or the
husband that went and actually bought the food?
The women go by most of it. See the men be working and
the women go by the grocery. I see. Did you ever own
any land around in Rockville? No, I didn't own
nothing until I bought this place. I always lived
on the other man's land. When I lived in town,
that's where my wife died. When I moved to Coal
Mine, when I moved to town, they sold all them
little huts out there when the mines closed. Them
farmers would come in there and they bought them.
When did most of the mines close up to your
recollection? The last mine that was up there was
in 33. Would you say the Depression closed them?
Yeah, there was no sale for the lignite.
Do you ever just sit back and think about those
days? Oh yeah, I wish some of it would come back. It
was a good place. Yeah, we'd all get together,
Bessie and me. We'd all get together and go to them
feasts. Down there, they'd mess and fix some big
old meals for me and my wife.
What kind of food did they serve you? Oh, man,
they'd make these style old pepper stuff.
Everything had pepper in it, but we liked it.
They'd make these cornmeal tortillas and flour
tortillas. Mix it all up. kill a hog or a cow or
something, got there and put him on, have a big,
they didn't know what barbecue was them days.
They'd take, you know the way the Minskans
barbecued, then they'd take the meat, they'd dig a
big hole, wrap it up with thick paper, and put a big
tow sack around it, put the fire in that hole and
cover it up, and that's the way they barbecued it.
My goodness. That's good. That's going right.
It's just as good as anything you ever see. It'd be
just as nice and juicy. I've seen them set the old
cow's head and make a good meal out of them. Gosh.
There's a big old cow. I've seen them. That's
pretty good eating. You know, that cow's bag is
white meat. You get out there and you eat some of
that cow's bag. It is good eating. Would you say on
the whole that The Mexicans were not able to save
money? Well, they never did make enough to save
anything them days. So if they had relatives back
in Mexico, they really couldn't help them out by
working. Yeah. Every once in a while, they'd take a
trip. They let them go back and forage them days. It
wasn't restricted or whatnot. They'd go back over
there. I've had two or three chances when they
asked me if I wanted to go to Mexico with them, but I
never did go. They said they'd pay my way and
everything and see that I got back. But I never did
go. Mexico's a nice place. I've been there a couple
times. Yeah. I've had lots of chances to go.
No, they'd send a message over. I'd give them four,
five, six hundred dollars. He'd go over the coast.
They had to pay so much to get him out of there, you
know, out of Mexico. Sometimes they'd bring back
25 or 30 Mexicans. So the mine owners would give...
To bring them to the mine, they didn't call. They
must have really been able to trust that. See, they
weren't as strict then as they are now. Let me...
Okay, they would take a Mexican worker and give him
the money, and he would go down to Mexico and bring
back... And get him back. I see. pay their way back,
because they had to pay their way back.
They'd give them four or five hundred dollars to
bring them back, pay their way, and it didn't cost
them nothing. The mine owners furnished it. Just
to get them in here to go to work for them. None of the
mine owners or their representatives went down
with them. Would you say that the Mexicans were
smuggled in? No, not then Dave. Not that I know of.
They'd just go over there and go across. I don't
know whether they paid anything enough, see?
Sometimes they wanted to give the Mexicans four or
five hundred dollars to bring the boys back, pay
their way. I guess they let them come back then.
They wasn't as strict in them days. See, we got a lot
of wetbacks over here now. Swimmed across and all
that. Well, what happened to all the Mexican
mining families? Well, they had some of them went
Dallas, some would go different places on these
construction jobs. They all left that I know of
there, but two or three of these old Mexicans left
here, and they owned their little old places down
there. They bought these little old shacks.
Four or five of them lived here in town that worked
out there. Do you know their names?
I can't think of them right now. Well, if you think
about it, would you think about